Add description of data node bootstrapping (#266)
timescale/docs.timescale.com-content: multinode/bootstrapping.md

The steps to boostrap the data node are:

1. Ensure that there is a database on the data node.
2. Ensure that the Timescale extension is available in the database.
3. Set metadata on the data node.

## Setting up the database on the data node

The database to bootstrap on the data node is given by the name of the
current database on the access node. For example, if you are connected
to the `postgres` database on the access node, the database name will
be `postgres` on the data node as well.

To provision the data node in a different database on the instance use
the `database` option to the [`add_data_node`][add_data_node] command,
for example:

```
SELECT * FROM add_data_node('data_node_1', 'data1.example.com',
                            database => 'my_database');
```

This is particularly useful if you want to experiment with having data
nodes and access nodes in the same Postgres instance.

### Bootstrapping the database

If `bootstrap` is true (which is the default), the access node will
first connect to either the `postgres` database or, if the `postgres`
database does not exist, to the `template0` database on the data node,
and create a new database:

```

> CREATE DATABASE <database>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CREATE DATABASE < database >
```
This is necessary due to a quirk of our markdown parser that treats `<database>` as a potential React JSX element, even within code blocks.  Alternatively, you could use symbols other than `<>`

Author: What is used elsewhere? I have no strong opinion on what to use, but this is intended to be a [replacable](https://tdg.docbook.org/tdg/4.5/replaceable.html)

Author: Switched to use `<i>` tags, not sure if that is supported, but I see it in other parts of the document.

>    TEMPLATE template0 OWNER <owner>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   TEMPLATE template0 OWNER < owner >
```

>    ENCODING <encoding> LC_COLLATE <collation>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ENCODING <encoding> LC_COLLATE < collation >
```

>    LC_CTYPE <character type>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   LC_CTYPE < character type >
```

```

Here, the `owner` is the user connected on the access node and the
`encoding`, `collation`, and `character type` parameters are taken
from the current database on the access node.

Once the database is created, the access node disconnects and continues
with bootstrapping the extension. If the database already exists on
the data node, the procedure validates the database and proceeds with
setting up the extension.

### Validating the database

The database will be validated by checking that the encoding,
character type, and collation are the same as the current database on
the access node.

## Setting up the extension

The `timescaledb` extension needs to be installed in the database on
the data node, so the next step is ensuring that there is a valid
extension installed in the database by either:

* creating the extension, or

> 

Reviewer: Why this empty line?  Looks weird when rendered:

<img width="801" alt="Screen Shot 2019-12-19 at 11 39 36 AM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/12288273/71191346-43e68700-2254-11ea-8141-904888a8c1a0.png">

To install the extension, a schema is created to store the objects
that the `timescaledb` extension needs. The schema name is decided by
looking at what schema name is used for the extension on the access node and
using the same name on the data node. If you have created the
`timescaledb` extension in the default manner, `public` will be used
for the schema on the access node, hence `public` will be used on the
data node as well.

If the schema name for the extension on the access node is `public`,
no new schema is created, but otherwise it is expected that the schema
name does *not* exist. In the event that the schema name exists (but
is not `public`), an error will be raised and the bootstrapping will abort.

To change the schema used on the access node and data node, you can
create a new schema, then create the extension with the schema that
you want:

```
CREATE SCHEMA magic;
CREATE EXTENSION timescaledb SCHEMA magic;
```

When validating the schema, it is necessary that the schema is owned
by the current user, or is `public`.

>:TIP: This will place all the Timescale functions (for example,
> `create_hypertable` in the `magic` schema), so you need to qualify

> > all function references with `magic`. For example:

Reviewer: > Creating the extension in a non-default schema will automatically place all TimescaleDB functions into that schema.  Therefore, all function references must be qualified within that schema.  For example, to call `create_hypertable` from the previous `magic` schema:

>
> ```
> SELECT * FROM magic.create_hypertable('conditions', 'time', 3);
> ```

### Installing the extension

After the schema is created, the extension is installed using the
`CREATE EXTENSION` command with the `SCHEMA` option to refer to the
schema from the section above. The schema name for the extension will
be either `public` or a dedicated schema name.

If the extension already exists, it is validated to ensure that it

> can be used with the access node and the procedure proceeds to set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be used with the access node and the procedure then sets
```

Author: Done.

the metadata.

### Validating the extension

Validation of the extension checks that the extension on the data node

> is of a version that is compatible with the version on the access node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is of a version that is compatible with the version on the access node,
```

and that the access node has permissions to use the extension.

The extension on the data node is compatible with the extension on the

> access node if the major versions are the same and the minor version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
access node if the major versions are the same, and the minor version
```

# Data Node Bootstrapping [](distdb-bootstrap)

Scaling up TimescaleDB is achieved by adding data nodes to an access
node using the [`add_data_node`][add_data_node] and
[`attach_data_node`][attach_data_node] functions. In order for a data
node to be available to the access node it is necessary to ensure that
it is properly setup to work as a data node. This process is referred
to as *bootstrapping the data node*, which is done automatically each
time a data node is added to an access node (unless `bootstrap` is
false, in which case it just verifies that the data node is properly
set up).

The steps performed when boostrapping a data node are:

> 1. Connect to the data node and authenticating the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Connect to the data node and authenticate the user.
```

> 1. Check that there is a database on the data node and create it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Check that there is the database on the data node and create it
```
If I don't mistake, the database should have a specific name, not an any database, right?

   otherwise.

> 2. Check that the Timescale extension is available in the database or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Check that the TimescaleDB extension is available in the database or
```
There is no extension with name `Timescale`.

   create it otherwise.
3. Set metadata on the data node.

## Authentication during bootstrapping

All connections to the data node are made as the current user on the
access node. Which requires that:

1. The current user exists on both the data node and access node.
2. The data node is set up to handle logins using either certificates

>    or password files, as described in the [Data Node Authentication

Author: It exists.

   Chapter][distdb-auth].

## Adding data nodes to the access node

A new data node is added to the access node using the
[`add_data_node`][add_data_node] command.

```
SELECT * FROM add_data_node('data_node_1', 'data1.example.com');
```

The access node has to ensure that the database on the data node is
properly configured by either bootstrapping the database or verifying
that the database exists and is correctly configured. This is
controlled with the `bootstrap` option, which can be either `true`
(indicating that the data node should be bootstrapped) or `false`
(indicating that the data node will only be validated, but no
bootstrapping will take place).

```
SELECT * FROM add_data_node('data_node_1', 'data1.example.com',
                            boostrap => false);
```

The default value for the `bootstrap` option is `true`, which means
that the data node is bootstrapped when added.

## Setting up the database on the data node

The database to bootstrap on the data node is given by the name of the

> current database on the access node. For example, if you are connected

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this sentence. Is the database given or is the name fo the current database? I think it is either given or it uses the current database by default. Suggestion:
```suggestion
The database to bootstrap on the data node will have the name of the
  current database on the access node by default. For example, if you are connected
```

Author: Fixed.

to the `postgres` database on the access node, the database name will
be `postgres` on the data node as well.

To provision the data node in a different database on the instance use
the `database` option to the [`add_data_node`][add_data_node] command,
for example:

```
SELECT * FROM add_data_node('data_node_1', 'data1.example.com',
                            database => 'my_database');
```

This is particularly useful if you want to experiment with having data
nodes and access nodes in the same Postgres instance.

### Bootstrapping the database

If `bootstrap` is true (which is the default), the access node will
first connect to either the `postgres` database or, if the `postgres`
database does not exist, to the `template0` database on the data node,
and create a new database:

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```sql
```

CREATE DATABASE <i>database</i>
   TEMPLATE template0 OWNER <i>owner</i>
   ENCODING <encoding> LC_COLLATE <i>collation</i>
   LC_CTYPE <i>character type</i>
```

Here, the `owner` is the user connected on the access node and the
`encoding`, `collation`, and `character type` parameters are taken
from the current database on the access node.

Once the database is created, the access node disconnects and continues

> with bootstrapping the extension. If the database already exists on

Reviewer 2: To bootstrap extension the access node needs to connect. Since the formulation is detailed to disconnect, it should include connect too.

the data node, the procedure validates the database and proceeds with
setting up the extension.

### Validating the database

The database will be validated by checking that the encoding,
character type, and collation are the same as the current database on
the access node.

## Setting up the extension

The `timescaledb` extension needs to be installed in the database on
the data node, so the next step is ensuring that there is a valid
extension installed in the database by either:

* Creating the extension.
* Verifying that the extension is compatible with the extension
  installed on the access node.

### Creating the schema for the extension

> To install the extension, a schema is created to store the objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install the extension, a schema is created to store objects
```

that the `timescaledb` extension needs. The schema name is decided by
looking at what schema name is used for the extension on the access node and

> using the same name on the data node. If you have created the

Reviewer: Change to:
> The schema name on the data node is set to match the extension schema name on the access node

`timescaledb` extension in the default manner, `public` will be used
for the schema on the access node, hence `public` will be used on the
data node as well.

> If the schema name for the extension on the access node is `public`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the schema name on the access node is `public`,
```
'for the extension' is implied, since it was discussed in the previous paragraph

no new schema is created, but otherwise it is expected that the schema

> name does *not* exist. In the event that the schema name exists (but

Reviewer: Clarification...do you mean:
> no new schema is created _on the data node_, but otherwise it is expected that the schema name does *not* exist

It's not clear, since you are discussing the access node earlier in the sentence.

is not `public`), an error will be raised and the bootstrapping will abort.

To change the schema used on the access node and data node, you can

> create a new schema, then create the extension with the schema that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
create a new schema on the access node, then create the extension with the schema that
```
It is easy to confuse otherwise with the data node.

you want:

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```sql
```

CREATE SCHEMA magic;
CREATE EXTENSION timescaledb SCHEMA magic;
```

When validating the schema, it is necessary that the schema is owned
by the current user, or is `public`.

>:TIP: Creating the extension in a non-default schema will
> automatically place all TimescaleDB functions into that
> schema. Therefore, all function references must be qualified within
> that schema. For example, to call `create_hypertable` from the
> previous magic schema:
> 

> > ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> ```sql
```

> SELECT * FROM magic.create_hypertable('conditions', 'time', 3);
> ```

### Installing the extension

After the schema is created, the extension is installed using the
`CREATE EXTENSION` command with the `SCHEMA` option to refer to the
schema from the section above. The schema name for the extension will
be either `public` or a dedicated schema name.

If the extension already exists, it is validated to ensure that it can

> be used with the access node and the procedure then sets the metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be used with the access node, then the procedure sets the metadata.
```

### Validating the extension

Validation of the extension checks that the extension on the data node
is of a version that is compatible with the version on the access node
and that the access node has permissions to use the extension.

The extension on the data node is compatible with the extension on the
access node if the major versions are the same, and the minor version
on the data node is before or the same as the minor version on the

> access node. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
access node. The difference in the patch version doesn't affect compatibility. For example:
```
The example demonstrates that patch version can be any, so it is good to mention.

- Compatible: data node v1.3.1, access node v1.5.1
- Compatible: data node v1.3.5, access node v1.3.1

> - Incompatible: data node 1.4.1, access node v1.3.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Incompatible: data node v1.4.1, access node v1.3.1
```

> - Incompatible: data node 2.0.0, access node v1.3.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Incompatible: data node v2.0.0, access node v1.3.1
```

Reviewer: It's actually clearer if you remove the `v`s from all of the version numbers

In addition to validating the version, it is necessary to ensure that
the access node has sufficient privileges on the data node. This
requires that the connected user is the owner of the extension.

## Set the metadata

Once the extension is set up, the data node is marked as belonging to
the access node by setting the `dist_id` of the data node to the UUID
of the access node.

> [distdb-auth]: /getting-started/data-node-authentication

Reviewer: I realized that your PR from a while back added this page, but didn't modify the `page-index.js` file to point to it.  You need to add this location to the page index

> [distdb-auth]: /getting-started/data-node-authentication

Author: Not sure how to add it. I see it already in `page-index.js`: it is under "Setting Up TimescaleDB"

> [distdb-auth]: /getting-started/data-node-authentication

Reviewer: Ah, I see the problem.  The link needs to be `/getting-started/setup/data-node-authentication`

> [distdb-auth]: /getting-started/data-node-authentication

Author: Fixed.

# Data Node Bootstrapping [](distdb-bootstrap)

> Scaling up multi-node Timescale is achieved by adding data nodes to

Reviewer 2: The product is called TimescaleDB and `multi-node` seems to be tautology to `scaling up`:
```suggestion
Scaling up TimescaleDB is achieved by adding data nodes to
```

> the access nodes using the `add_data_node` and `attach_data_node`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
an access node using the `add_data_node` and `attach_data_node`
```

functions. In order for a data node to be available to the access node
it is necessary to ensure that it is properly setup to work as a data
node. This process is refereed to as *bootstrapping the data node*.

## Connections to the data node

All connections to the data node are made as the current user on the
access node. Which requires that:

> 1. The current user exists on both the data node and access node.

Reviewer 2: I believe it is important to mention which privileges the current user should have on the data nodes.

Author: These are the privileges required for connecting to the data node, but more are needed to actually bootstrap the data node.

2. The data node is set up to handle logins using either certificates
   or password files, as described in the [Data Node Authentication
   Chapter][distdb-auth].

## Adding data nodes to the access node

When an access node is adding a new data node to the distributed

> database it either bootstraps the data node itself or verifies that

Reviewer 2: `itself` is meaningless here:
```suggestion
database it either bootstraps the data node or verifies that
```

the data node is properly bootstrapped.

A new data node is added to the access node using the `add_data_node`
command.

```
SELECT * FROM add_data_node('data_node_1', 'data1.example.com');
```

> The database to bootstrap on the data node is given by the name of the

Reviewer 2: Providing a summary of the bootstrap steps will make this sentence meaningful, since bootstrapping a database on the data node was never mentioned.

A new data node is added to the access node using the
[`add_data_node`][add_data_node] command.

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```sql
```

> If you do not want to use the same database on the data node as on the

Reviewer 2: It can be simplified, e.g.,:
> If you want to provide different database name then the access node, use `database` option to the `add_data_node`:

Also I suggest to add that it is specifically useful if the data node is created in the same PostgreSQL cluster.

access node, this can be overridden using the `database` option to the
`add_data_node` command.

```
SELECT * FROM add_data_node('data_node_1', 'data1.example.com',
                            database => 'other');
```

> The access node has to ensure that there is a properly configured

Reviewer 2: As this paragraph is directly after discussing creation of the database, this seems to me confusing:
> there is a properly configured database
May be to formulate as:
> that the database is properly configured

Author: Handled. I had to reorder some paragraphs.

> database on the data node by either bootstrapping a new database or

Reviewer 2: IMHO it is important to mention that the above examples with omitted `bootstrap` option means `true`.

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```sql
```

without bootstrapping by using the `bootstrap => false` option.

```
SELECT * FROM add_data_node('data_node_1', 'data1.example.com',
                            boostrap => false);
```

> If a data node is not bootstrapped, only the validation steps below

Reviewer 2: If a data node is not bootstrapped, it is nothing to validate. Do you mean the case `bootstrap => false`?

Author: See the new text.

> are executed. If `bootstrap` is `true` (which is the default) the

Reviewer 2: How are the steps different from `bootstrap` is `false`?

Author: See the new text.

The database to bootstrap on the data node will have the name of the
current database on the access node by default. For example, if you
are connected to the `postgres` database on the access node, the
database name will be `postgres` on the data node as well.

To provision the data node in a different database on the instance use
the `database` option to the [`add_data_node`][add_data_node] command,
for example:

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```sql
```

SELECT * FROM add_data_node('data_node_1', 'data1.example.com',
                            database => 'my_database');
```

This is particularly useful if you want to experiment with having data
nodes and access nodes in the same Postgres instance.

### Bootstrapping the database

If `bootstrap` is `true` (which is the default), the access node will
first connect to either the `postgres` database or, if the `postgres`
database does not exist, to the `template0` database on the data node,
and create a new database:

```sql

> CREATE DATABASE < database >

Reviewer: OK, this is going to drive you crazy, but the brackets with the spaces still looked odd, so I did some experimentation.  As long as the code language is set as `sql` then the brackets with no spaces _does_ work.  I assume that when I was reviewing it before, the `sql` hadn't been added yet (when I took it out, the same problem cropped up when there were no spaces).  Some quirk with the code highlighting that I'll have to track down.  Anyway, if you want to keep as is, that's fine.  Otherwise you can remove the spaces as long as you keep the code block with a language attached.

Author: :D

Ok. I'll remove the spaces then and submit. If anything pops up, we can fix it separately. :)

> CREATE DATABASE <i>database</i>

Reviewer: These \<i\> element tags are not functioning how you anticipated?
![Screen Shot 2020-01-28 at 2 24 16 PM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/12288273/73297678-fe659400-41d9-11ea-9576-55c963782d86.png)

Better to just put a space between '\<' and the text, i.e. '< database >'

Author: Ok. Updated.

   TEMPLATE template0 OWNER <i>owner</i>
   ENCODING <encoding> LC_COLLATE <i>collation</i>
   LC_CTYPE <i>character type</i>
```

Here, the `owner` is the user connected on the access node and the
`encoding`, `collation`, and `character type` parameters are taken
from the current database on the access node.

Once the database is created, the access node disconnects and

> continues by connecting to the database and proceed with bootstrapping

Reviewer: ```suggestion
continues by connecting to the database and proceeds with bootstrapping
```
Sorry, missed this before

Author: Fixed.

### Validation of the database

If `bootstrap` is false, the database will be validated by checking
that the encoding, character type, and collation are the same as the
current database on the access node.

## Setting up the extension

The `timescaledb` extension needs to be installed in the database on
the data node, so the next step is ensuring that there is a valid

> extension installed in the database by either: Creating the extension,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
extension installed in the database by either: creating the extension,
```

or verifying that the extension is compatible with the extension
installed on the access node.

### Creating the schema for the extension

To install the extension, a schema is created to store the objects
that the `timescaledb` extension needs. The schema name is decided

> looking what schema is used for the extension on the access node and

Reviewer 2: If the extension is installed in several schemas on the access node, which one is it going to be used? Is it the same schema where the called `add_data_node` is located? May be provide an example.

E.g.:
```sql
CREATE SCHEMA distributed_db;
CREATE EXTENSION timescaledb SCHEMA distributed_db;
SELECT distributed_db.add_data_node(...);
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
looking at what schema name is used for the extension on the access node and
```

using the same name on the data node. If you have created the
`timescaledb` extension in the default manner, `public` will be used
for the schema on the access node, hence `public` will be used on the
data node as well.

If the schema name for the extension on the access node is `public`,
no new schema is created, but otherwise it is expected that the schema
name does *not* exist. In the event that the schema name exists (but
is not `public`), an error will be raised the bootstrapping aborted.

Alternative description:
> If the schema already exists on the data node the access node will

> > verify that it is correctly configured and proceed with installing

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by correctly configured schema?

Reviewer 2: @mkindahl BUMP

Author: It depends on the implementation I am not sure we need to describe it in detail here.

you want:

```
CREATE SCHEMA magic;
CREATE EXTENSION timescaledb SCHEMA magic;
```

When validating the schema, it is necessary that the schema is owned
by the current user, or is `public`.

> :TIP: This will place all the Timescale functions (for example,
> `create_hypertable` in the `magic` schema), so you need to qualify
> all function references with `magic`. For example:
>
> ```
> SELECT * FROM magic.create_hypertable('conditions', 'time', 3);
> ```

### Installing the extension

After the schema is created, the extension is installed using the
`CREATE EXTENSION` command with the `SCHEMA` option to refer to the
schema from the section above. The schema name for the extension will
be either `public` or a dedicated schema name.

If the extension already exists in the database, an error will be
raised and the bootstrapping aborted.

Proposed changes:
> If the extension already exists, it is validated to ensure that it
> can be used with the access node and the procedure proceeds to set
> the metadata.

### Validating the extension

Validation of the extension checks that the extension on the data node
is of a version that is compatible with the version on the access node

> and that the access node have permissions to use the extension.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean that the user has permission to use the extension?

Reviewer 2: I suggest to remove this introduction, since the explanation is close enough.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and that the access node has permissions to use the extension.
```

access node if the major versions are the same, and the minor version
on the data node is before or the same as the minor version on the
access node. The difference in the patch version doesn't affect compatibility. For example:

- Compatible: data node v1.3.1, access node v1.5.1
- Compatible: data node v1.3.5, access node v1.3.1
- Incompatible: data node v1.4.1, access node v1.3.1
- Incompatible: data node v2.0.0, access node v1.3.1

In addition to validating the version, it is necessary to ensure that
the access node has sufficient privileges on the data node. This
requires that the connected user is the owner of the extension.

## Set the metadata

Once the extension is set up, the data node is marked as belonging to
the access node by setting the `dist_id` of the data node to the UUID
of the access node.

> [distdb-auth]: /getting-started/data-node-authentication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[distdb-auth]: /getting-started/setup/data-node-authentication
```
This is the link that needed to change.

# Data Node Bootstrapping [](distdb-bootstrap)

Scaling up TimescaleDB is achieved by adding data nodes to an access
nodes using the [`add_data_node`][add_data_node] and
[`attach_data_node`][attach_data_node] functions. In order for a data
node to be available to the access node it is necessary to ensure that

> it is properly setup to work as a data node. This process is refereed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
it is properly setup to work as a data node. This process is referred
```

to as *bootstrapping the data node*.

## Connections to the data node

All connections to the data node are made as the current user on the
access node. Which requires that:

1. The current user exists on both the data node and access node.
2. The data node is set up to handle logins using either certificates
   or password files, as described in the [Data Node Authentication
   Chapter][distdb-auth].

## Adding data nodes to the access node

When an access node is adding a new data node to the distributed
database it either bootstraps the data node or verifies that
the data node is properly bootstrapped.

A new data node is added to the access node using the
[`add_data_node`][add_data_node] command.

```
SELECT * FROM add_data_node('data_node_1', 'data1.example.com');
```

The access node has to ensure that the database on the data node is
properly configured by either bootstrapping the database or verifying

> that the database is correctly configured. This is controlled with the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
that the database exists and is correctly configured. This is controlled with the
```

`bootstrap` option, which can be either `true` (indicating that the
data node should be bootstrapped) or `false` (indicating that the data
node will only be validated, but no bootstrapping will take place).

```
SELECT * FROM add_data_node('data_node_1', 'data1.example.com',
                            boostrap => false);
```

The default value for the `bootstrap` option is `true`, which means
that the data node is bootstrapped when added.

The steps to boostrap the data node are:

> 1. Ensure that there is a database on the data node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Create the database on the data node.
```
Same suggestion for the next line.

Reviewer 3: No, that was a bad suggestion on my part.  I was thinking of the `if_not_exists` functionality.

2. Ensure that the extension is available in the database.
3. Set metadata on the data node.

## Setting up the database on the data node

The database to bootstrap on the data node is given by the name of the
current database on the access node. For example, if you are connected
to the `postgres` database on the access node, the database name will
be `postgres` on the data node as well.

> To place the data node in a different database on the data node use

Author: Not sure I follow. A data node is represented as a database in a PostgreSQL cluster, so not sure if you can place a database "on" a data node.

> To place the data node in a different database on the data node use

Author: Maybe "provision", but I do not think that "convert" is the proper name. A data node is a database with the extension loaded, a schema, and some metadata that is set for the data node, so it is still a database but also a data node.

Rewrote it, PTAL.

the `database` option to the [`add_data_node`][add_data_node] command,
for example:

```
SELECT * FROM add_data_node('data_node_1', 'data1.example.com',
                            database => 'my_database');
```

This is particularly useful if you want to experiment with having data

> nodes and access nodes in the same Postgres cluster.

Author: Instance is better.

### Bootstrapping the database

If `bootstrap` is true (which is the default), the access node will
first connect to either the `postgres` database or, if the `postgres`
database does not exist, to the `template0` database on the data node
and create new database:

```
CREATE DATABASE <database>
   TEMPLATE template0 OWNER <owner>
   ENCODING <encoding> LC_COLLATE <collation>
   LC_CTYPE <character type>
```

> Here, the *owner* is the user connected on the access node, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, the `owner` is the user connected on the access node, the
```

> *encoding*, *collation*, and *character type* parameters are taken

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`encoding`, `collation`, and `character type` parameters are taken
```

from the current database on the access node.

> Once the database is created, the access node disconnect and continue

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the database is created, the access node disconnects and continues
```

with bootstrapping the extension. If the database already exists on
the data node, the procedure validates the database and proceeds with
setting up the extension.

### Validating the database

The database will be validated by checking that the encoding,
character type, and collation are the same as the current database on
the access node.

## Setting up the extension

The `timescaledb` extension needs to be installed in the database on
the data node, so the next step is ensuring that there is a valid

> extension installed in the database by either: creating the extension,

Reviewer: Split choices into a list?

or verifying that the extension is compatible with the extension
installed on the access node.

### Creating the schema for the extension

To install the extension, a schema is created to store the objects

> that the `timescaledb` extension needs. The schema name is decided

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that the `timescaledb` extension needs. The schema name is decided by
```

looking what schema is used for the extension on the access node and
using the same name on the data node. If you have created the
`timescaledb` extension in the default manner, `public` will be used
for the schema on the access node, hence `public` will be used on the
data node as well.

If the schema name for the extension on the access node is `public`,
no new schema is created, but otherwise it is expected that the schema
name does *not* exist. In the event that the schema name exists (but

> is not `public`), an error will be raised the bootstrapping aborted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is not `public`), an error will be raised and the bootstrapping will abort.
```

> `create_hypertable` in the `magic` schema), so you need to qualify
> all function references with `magic`. For example:
>
> ```
> SELECT * FROM magic.create_hypertable('conditions', 'time', 3);
> ```

### Installing the extension

After the schema is created, the extension is installed using the
`CREATE EXTENSION` command with the `SCHEMA` option to refer to the
schema from the section above. The schema name for the extension will
be either `public` or a dedicated schema name.

If the extension already exists in the database, an error will be
raised and the bootstrapping aborted.

Proposed changes:
> If the extension already exists, it is validated to ensure that it
> can be used with the access node and the procedure proceeds to set
> the metadata.

### Validating the extension

Validation of the extension checks that the extension on the data node
is of a version that is compatible with the version on the access node
and that the access node have permissions to use the extension.

The extension on the data node is compatible with the extension on the
access node if the major versions are the same and the minor version

> on the data node is before or same as the minor version on the access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on the data node is before or the same as the minor version on the access
```

node. The patch version is ignored for the purpose of this comparison.

In addition to validating the version, it is necessary to ensure that

> the access node have sufficient privileges on the data node. This is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the access node has sufficient privileges on the data node. This is
```

you want:

```
CREATE SCHEMA magic;
CREATE EXTENSION timescaledb SCHEMA magic;
```

When validating the schema, it is necessary that the schema is owned
by the current user, or is `public`.

> :TIP: This will place all the Timescale functions (for example,
> `create_hypertable` in the `magic` schema), so you need to qualify
> all function references with `magic`. For example:
>
> ```
> SELECT * FROM magic.create_hypertable('conditions', 'time', 3);
> ```

### Installing the extension

After the schema is created, the extension is installed using the
`CREATE EXTENSION` command with the `SCHEMA` option to refer to the
schema from the section above. The schema name for the extension will
be either `public` or a dedicated schema name.

If the extension already exists in the database, an error will be
raised and the bootstrapping aborted.

Proposed changes:
> If the extension already exists, it is validated to ensure that it
> can be used with the access node and the procedure proceeds to set
> the metadata.

### Validating the extension

Validation of the extension checks that the extension on the data node
is of a version that is compatible with the version on the access node

> and that the access node has permissions to use the extension.

Author: Done.

The extension on the data node is compatible with the extension on the
access node if the major versions are the same and the minor version
on the data node is before or the same as the minor version on the access

> node. The patch version is ignored for the purpose of this comparison.

Author: Added a few examples.

In addition to validating the version, it is necessary to ensure that
the access node has sufficient privileges on the data node. This is
checked by ensuring that the connected user is the owner of the
extension.

## Set the metadata

[ Need to mention that we do some verification here if there is no
bootstrapping and also checks that are done on the access node to make
sure that it does not have the role of a data node. /Mats]

> Once the extension is set up, the data node is marked as belonging to

Author: I wonder if "flagged" is the right word. The =dist_uuid= field in the =metadata= table is set to the =uuid= of the access node. Wouldn't that be more similar to "marked", "imbued", "colored", or something along those lines?

> Once the extension is set up, the data node is marked as belonging to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the extension is set up, the data node is assigned to
```
Maybe this is clearer?

# Data Node Bootstrapping [](distdb-bootstrap)

Scaling up TimescaleDB is achieved by adding data nodes to an access
node using the [`add_data_node`][add_data_node] and
[`attach_data_node`][attach_data_node] functions. In order for a data
node to be available to the access node it is necessary to ensure that
it is properly setup to work as a data node. This process is referred
to as *bootstrapping the data node*.

> ## Connections to the data node

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Authentication during bootstrapping
```

All connections to the data node are made as the current user on the
access node. Which requires that:

1. The current user exists on both the data node and access node.
2. The data node is set up to handle logins using either certificates
   or password files, as described in the [Data Node Authentication
   Chapter][distdb-auth].

## Adding data nodes to the access node

> While an access node is adding a new data node to the distributed

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When an access node adds a new data node to the distributed
```

database it either bootstraps the data node or verifies that
the data node is properly bootstrapped.

A new data node is added to the access node using the
[`add_data_node`][add_data_node] command.

```
SELECT * FROM add_data_node('data_node_1', 'data1.example.com');
```

The access node has to ensure that the database on the data node is
properly configured by either bootstrapping the database or verifying

> that the database exists and is correctly configured. This is controlled with the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
that the database exists and is correctly configured. The behavior is controlled with the
```

`bootstrap` option, which can be either `true` (indicating that the
data node should be bootstrapped) or `false` (indicating that the data
node will only be validated, but no bootstrapping will take place).

```
SELECT * FROM add_data_node('data_node_1', 'data1.example.com',
                            boostrap => false);
```

The default value for the `bootstrap` option is `true`, which means
that the data node is bootstrapped when added.

The steps to boostrap the data node are:

> 1. Ensure that there is a database on the data node.

Reviewer 4: I think it would be better if this list is upfront instead of last in this section (I think this might also be what @k-rus  asked for). It is generally easier to first have a big picture overview of the process and then drill down into the details. Then the reader knows better what to expect.

Author: Tried to reformulate it. PTAL.

2. Ensure that the Timescale extension is available in the database.
3. Set metadata on the data node.

## Setting up the database on the data node

The database to bootstrap on the data node is given by the name of the
current database on the access node. For example, if you are connected
to the `postgres` database on the access node, the database name will
be `postgres` on the data node as well.

To provision the data node in a different database on the instance use
the `database` option to the [`add_data_node`][add_data_node] command,
for example:

```
SELECT * FROM add_data_node('data_node_1', 'data1.example.com',
                            database => 'my_database');
```

This is particularly useful if you want to experiment with having data
nodes and access nodes in the same Postgres instance.

### Bootstrapping the database

If `bootstrap` is true (which is the default), the access node will
first connect to either the `postgres` database or, if the `postgres`
database does not exist, to the `template0` database on the data node,
and create a new database:

```

> CREATE DATABASE <database>

Reviewer 4: While I think it is great to document things, I am wondering what purpose these detailed bootstrapping docs serve (thinking mostly about stuff from this section and onward)? Do we intend for people to run through these steps manually?

I am worried that this will confuse people more than it helps given that this is automated by the `add_data_node` command. Further, these docs will easily get outdated as soon as we make a small change to the bootstrapping processes. 

If this is about making people better understand what is going on internally, then I think we should rather improve error messages and notices.

Author: I've gotten questions about how it works several times when on support. Also, if this procedure changes frequently, then we have done a bad job at the design, so that do not worry me too much. Once we release this, it will be stable only because it has to be stable.

Reviewer 4: Sounds great that we have such interest and it would be interesting to deep-dive into that conversation. I've been following at least the `multinode-beta` channel but haven't seen any questions on the bootstrapping process so far (apart from the Docker extension issue, which is since fixed). Do you have a reference to those questions about the bootstrapping process on support Slack? 

Taking a step back though, the reason I am pushing back a bit is that I generally have the opinion that any need for detailed documentation is a signal that you've failed to provide a good interface. Most people never read the documentation and it easily gets out-of-date, so I am simply trying to manage trade-offs here. I'd rather have engineers spending time on code than docs, instead making sure that the interfaces are clear and that the code works in such a way that it makes documentation almost redundant.

Anyway, if you think this is important I am fine with merging this. I am just trying to look at the bigger docs picture than nitpicking spelling errors, grammar, etc.

Author: Yes, I agree that there is a possibility that the documentation will become out-of-date as we move forward, but:

- I do not think it is an argument against providing it both for ourselves and for the users.
- Documenting our intentions will allow users to provide feedback, which will make the product better.
- As we move forward, the documentation will be stable because changes cannot be arbitrarily made to the code and we need to keep these things stable to allow upgrades.

> all function references with `magic`. For example:
>
> ```
> SELECT * FROM magic.create_hypertable('conditions', 'time', 3);
> ```

### Installing the extension

After the schema is created, the extension is installed using the
`CREATE EXTENSION` command with the `SCHEMA` option to refer to the
schema from the section above. The schema name for the extension will
be either `public` or a dedicated schema name.

If the extension already exists in the database, an error will be
raised and the bootstrapping aborted.

Proposed changes:
> If the extension already exists, it is validated to ensure that it
> can be used with the access node and the procedure proceeds to set
> the metadata.

### Validating the extension

Validation of the extension checks that the extension on the data node
is of a version that is compatible with the version on the access node
and that the access node has permissions to use the extension.

The extension on the data node is compatible with the extension on the
access node if the major versions are the same and the minor version
on the data node is before or the same as the minor version on the access
node. For example:

> - Compatible: data node v1.3.1, access node v1.5.1

Reviewer 4: The policy for extension compatibility seems a lot more important than the process of bootstrapping in general. Can we try to emphasize the policy and reduce the process stuff?  Another question is if this validation is specific to bootstrapping? Shouldn't it happen on every connection or at least also during upgrades (i.e., when the data node already exists)? I am asking because the information here seems important outside the context of bootstrapping (e.g., as part of a section on node compatibility or upgrading). Now this important information is buried in a lot of bootstrapping implementation detail.

Generally, I think it is best to focus on documenting _what_ we do and _why_, instead of _how_ we do it.

Author: Yes, the verification happens each time a connection is established, so it is not restricted to only the bootstrapping.

I think this is a description of what we do and why? Not sure what you think should be written differently.

Reviewer 4: Just saying that extension compatibility seems more important than other minute details here which warrants lifting it up from being buried in these bootstrapping details. And, further, node validation doesn't seem to be specific to bootstrapping. So, my comment is about structure rather than content.

In other words, these two things (extension version compatibility and validation) are connected. I could imagine, e.g., a separate (more front-and-center) doc/chapter on requirements/prerequisites/policy related to node interactions that are relevant to both upgrades and bootstrapping that doesn't require digging into the details of the bootstrapping process. If I imagine myself wearing the hat of a cluster administrator I would personally prefer a concise chapter specifically on node requirements and compatibility. This is crucial for me to conceptualize how to organize and maintain a cluster, without having to care about the details of the bootstrapping process.

So, what I am proposing is organizing this differently to aid readers by separating key information from minute details. Concretely we'd separate requirements/prerequisites/policy from bootstrapping details. For example, if you write "Validation of the extension checks that the extension on the data node
is of a version that is compatible with the version on the access node" you need not list the exact policy for compatibility, including examples here. Just reference another chapter that clearly and concisely deals with that, and which we can easily index in the TOC and reference from other places in the doc (e.g., upgrade docs).

But maybe this is part of a larger docs conversation that is better suited in another forum? I just worry that this will never happen if we just let the docs grow organically without thinking about the larger organization and structure.

Author: I think it is good to make the information available to the user, but I agree that we do need to look over the high-level structure. I think we can move the information as a separate PR for creating a description about validation.

- Compatible: data node v1.3.5, access node v1.3.1
- Incompatible: data node 1.4.1, access node v1.3.1
- Incompatible: data node 2.0.0, access node v1.3.1

In addition to validating the version, it is necessary to ensure that
the access node has sufficient privileges on the data node. This is
checked by ensuring that the connected user is the owner of the
extension.

> ## Set the metadata

Reviewer 4: This seems very much like implementation detail. Do we need this?

Author: It is a very small detail so I do not see it as a big problem to add. Also, we cannot really change this between versions, so it is very stable.

For need: there are DBAs that need to repair or understand a problem. This is really where the documentation is really needed.

Reviewer 4: Ok, I buy that.

> [ Need to mention that we do some verification here if there is no

Reviewer 4: Why do we need to mention verification? Ideally, this is not something a user should have to worry about unless we've done something wrong. And, in case of failures, we should focus on raising insightful errors.

Author: I do not think that it is a matter of either documentation or error messages. IMHO, providing documentation that is sufficient enough for debugging it is part of the solution.

Reviewer 4: Just worried that there is no clear point where we draw the line and this is certainly an increased maintenance burden. I'd rather have basic docs that cover 80-90% (or whatever a reasonable number is) and than add details as needed when we know what things trip people up. Not saying this particular detail will never be useful, but we need to put our resources on things that gives us most bang-for-the-buck and covering all bases now is going to be a massive undertaking.
